@node    GTK+, , Top, Top
@ifhtml
<a name=gtk>
@end ifhtml

@chapter GTK+ interface

This chapter describes the interface for @code{GTK+}, the Open Source
Free Software GUI Toolkit, primarily developed for use with the X Window
System. The most detailed information about @code{GTK+} may be found at
@url{http://www.gtk.org}.

The interface is designed after the popular @code{guile-gtk} analog, the
@code{GTK+} interface for using with @code{guile} scheme
implementation. My intention was to make the interface as compatible
with that of @code{guile-gtk} as possible in order to utilize the
tutorials, examples and other software written for @code{guile-gtk}.

For generation of multiple interfaces to @code{GTK+} functions the
@code{cgen} utility was developed @xref{cgen}, which was used to process
the specification of @code{GTK+} interface found in @code{guile-gtk}.

@code{guile-gtk} may be found at
@url{http://www.ping.de/sites/zagadka/guile-gtk/}.

@section Testing the GTK interface

Since the main goal of GTK+ is to provide a graphical user interface, it
is practically impossible to test it automatically. Instead, a test
application was derived from analogous program provided with GTK+ (file
gtk/testgtk.c in GTK+ distribution) and guile-gtk.
 
Also this application may be used as a source of examples how to use
bigloo-gtk.

@subsection testgtk program

The @code{testgtk} is port of @code{testgtk.c} provided with GTK+
distribution, to @code{bigloo-gtk}. Initially is was derived from
@code{testgtk.scm} provided with @code{guile-gtk}. Now most of the text
is redesigned, many tests made more up-to-date than the corresponding
@code{guile-gtk} analogs.

All the original tests @code{testgtk.c} from latest GTK+ distribution
are listed in main @code{testgtk} window, labels for whose that are
still unimplemented are grayed.

The simplest way to run the @code{testgtk} is to process its source code
by @code{bigloo-bgtk} driver program:

@example
bigloo-bgtk ./testgtk.defs
@end example

but to make all the tests work, you probably have to compile and run binary
executable:

@example
make testgtk && ./testgtk
@end example

@subsection example programs

@code{Bigloo-gtk} provides a small set of examples, derived from whose
provided in "GTK+ Tutorial". You'll find the examples in
@code{gtk/examples/} subdirectory. All the examples are shell scripts,
though may be compiled. You need to install the package before running
this examples.

@section Bigloo-gtk reference

Currently this reference guide of very far from completeness.  Only
selected calls are documented. Look at working tests code in
@code{testgtk.defs} for example.

@include gdk-refman.texi
@include gtk-refman.texi

